Soderblom et al 2010. review of "The Ages of Stars"

Soderblom, now a senior staff scientist at Space Telescope in Baltimore gives a
look from 2010 at different prospects for age-dating stars. Table 1 is most
instructive. He starts with "semifundamental" methods:

* nucleocosmochronometry.
* kinematics

then model-dependent methods
* isochrones
* lithium depltion boundary
* asteroseismology

then empirically-calibrated methods
* stellar spindown
* decay of activity
* decline in lithium.

Nucleocosmochronometry, other than being a mouthful, is the idea that you can
age-date stars by looking at abundances of radioactive isotopes. This has been
done for U and Th (halflives 4.47Gyr and 14.05Gyr, respectively), by measuring
their absorption lines in metal poor stars.  The stars must be metal poor (Pop
II), because otherwise the absorption lines blend. Even then, it's a hard
measurement to make. One issue is that you need to assume an initial abundane.
He indicates that it might work for ensembles of MS stars though.

For kinematics, the idea is to use ensembles of pre-MS stars, and trace their
orbits in the galacitc potential. Not applicable for older stars because of
"phase-space mixing".

For model-dependent methods, he notes that isochrone fitting is HARD to make
precise. Lithium depletion only works when the stars are young.
Asteroseismology has great promise, particularly for subgiants and giant stars.
But for FGK dwarfs, you need very precise photometry at high cadence for long
durations.

For empircally-calibrated methods, he notes that stellar spindown is perhaps
the best-studied. This is especially true now, after Kepler.

----------

Soderblom makes some important philosophical points.

1) a star's age cannot be measured. It can only be estimated or inferred.

2) we have only one stellar age that is both precise and acurate: that of the
Sun. This is also known thru radioactive decay of elements in asteroids.

3) what is t=0? Theory might say when hydrostatic eqm begins. But it's hard to
pinpoint observationally. Might say ZAMS. But then pre-ZAMS stars have negative
age, which is silly. Stahler 1988 notes a "deuterium-burning birthline", the
point where protostars lose their shrouds and reveal themselves. At that point,
an Msun star is ~1e5 years old. It's observationally tractable, and so is a
good thing to adopt.

4) we should be able to understand the closest stars at least as well as we can
the entire cosmos! However our universe age from the CMB is better than most
stellar ages.

---------- 

Some ideas from reading this review:

* We know that one path for unbinding star clusters is colliding them with
  molecular clouds inside the galactic disk.  But what happens to a planetary
  system if it collides with a molecular cloud? Does it become less bound? How
  should the architecture evolve?

* We know that isochrone ages from Kepler are hard to interpret. But for fixed
  Mstar, what if we looked at the population in different stellar rotation
  period bins?
  i.e., for G dwarfs, look at Rp vs Porb maps for Prot in
   * 30-25 days
   * 25-20 days
   * 20-15 days,
  etc. We know this corresponds to a SEQUENTIAL ordering in age. This is all we
  care about, for a correctly asked question. Should look at calibrations in
  detail, but Prot=10days <~> 1Gyr, Prot=20days <~> 3Gyr,
  Prot=25days <~> 4.57Gyr, etc.

  * in particular, you want to do this for the AVERAGE NUMBER OF PLANETS PER
    STAR. Focus, at first, on hot Jupiters. Get the CKS sample. Calculate the
    average NPPS in the above bins. Do you see evolution? Less HJs per star
    around the slowest rotators? (-> tidal infall!)

  If you're interested in this path, check out reviews on spindown and angular
  momentum evolution:
  * Barnes 2009
  * Irwin and Bouvier 2009
  * Mamajek 2009
  and perhaps two of the main calibration papers:
  * Barnes 2007
  * Mamajek and Hillenbrand 2008.
  But be aware that inherent scatter can mess up interpretations. For Hyades
    (600Myr) and Coma clusters, ~40% Prot scatter -- quoted by
  * Collier Cameron et al 2009.

  Note that looking at R_HK indicators (measured for CKS) is a possible sanity
  check, since this also evolves over time.

* We should see a resurgence of kinematic age estimation with Gaia. It's
  applicable to very young ensembles of stars, fo rwhich few or no other age
  estimators work well. This might help us date young groups up to ~20Myr.

* there are many examples of bayesian isochrone age fitting in the literature.
  Pont & Eyer (2004)
  Jorgensen & Lindegren (2005)
  Takeda+ 2007: well-defined isochrone ages are only POSSIBLE for a subset of
    stars. Works best for the massive ones, and the ones near turnoff. The
    error analysis for isochrone ages is COMPLEX and NONGAUSSIAN. Uncertainties are
    large even when you get well-defined ages.

* Yuan Sen is the local guy who would interested in this kind of large bayesian
  age study.

* Vincent Van Eylen is the local guy who I should ask for references about
  Kepler asteroseismic ages.




